---
title: Motivation and Introduction
layout: post
---

<span class="firstcharacter">T</span>his series of posts is to force myself to forcus on the most important things of machine learning. Being focused means that to know _what I should do_ and _what I should not do_ in terms of career development.

When you go to hunt for a job, you will notice that there are many titles in the job market, such as data scientist, machine learning engineer, deep learning engineer, data analyst, NLP engineer, computer vision engineer, etc. Some of those jobs will require you to focus on research, some of them will require you to focus on engineering, and some of them will require you to focus on data analysis. Even for engineers, some of them will require you to focus on the development of the model, some of them will require you to focus on the deployment of the model, and some of them will require you to focus on the software engineering of the model.


Since in the end, everyone has to make a choice, I think it is important to know exactly what you want to do. This series of posts is to help me to make a choice and also to help me to sharpen my skills in the area that I want to focus on.


## Team Structure in the Industry

Over the last few months, I have been actively looking for a job in the machine learning field. I have noticed that there are mainly three types of teams in the industry:

1. **Research Team**: This team is mainly focused on research. They are responsible for developing new algorithms and improving the existing algorithms. They are also responsible for writing papers and attending conferences. The team members are usually Ph.D. students or researchers.
    - Most of the time, those big companies have a research team. For example, Google Brain, Facebook AI Research, OpenAI, etc.
2. **Engineering Team**: This team is mainly focused on engineering. They are responsible for developing the model, deploying the model, and maintaining the model. The team members are usually software engineers or machine learning engineers.
    - For the engineering team, there are also different types along the pipeline:
        - **Data Engineering**: This team is responsible for collecting, storing, and processing the data. Daily tasks include writing ETL pipelines, building data warehouses, and maintaining data pipelines.
        - **Model Engineering**: This team is responsible for developing the model. Daily tasks include training the model, tuning the hyperparameters, and improving the model performance.
        - **Deployment/Software Engineering**: This team is responsible for deploying the model. Daily tasks include building the API, monitoring the model, and maintaining the model. Unless deploying machine learning models is different from deploying traditional software, this team is also responsible for the software engineering of the model.
3. **Data Analysis Team**: This team is mainly focused on data analysis. They are responsible for analyzing the data, finding insights from the data, and making data-driven decisions. The team members are usually data analysts or business analysts.

4. **Tech Lead**: This is not a team but a role. The tech lead is responsible for leading the team. The tech lead is responsible for making technical decisions, mentoring the team members, and communicating with other teams. The tech lead is usually a senior software engineer or a senior machine learning engineer who will <span class="emphasis">monitor</span> the full cycle of the machine learning pipeline and make sure that the team is on the right track.
  